Today we go deep on neural networks. I'm Dr. Sarah Chen, welcome back to CS401.
Neural networks are loosely inspired by the structure of the brain, though the analogy is imperfect.
The basic unit is the artificial neuron, which computes a weighted sum of its inputs.
That sum passes through an activation function, introducing the non-linearity networks need.
Without non-linear activations, stacking layers would just collapse into a single linear transformation.
Common activation functions include ReLU, sigmoid, tanh, and the newer GELU.
ReLU — Rectified Linear Unit — is simply max(0, x). Fast to compute, avoids vanishing gradients.
A feedforward network organizes neurons into layers: input, one or more hidden, and output.
Information flows in one direction — forward — from input to output during inference.
Training requires propagating errors backward through the network — this is backpropagation.
Backpropagation applies the chain rule of calculus to compute gradients layer by layer.
Each parameter receives a gradient indicating how much it contributed to the loss.
Gradient descent then nudges each parameter slightly in the direction that reduces loss.
Convolutional Neural Networks — CNNs — are specialized for grid-like data such as images.
A convolutional layer slides a learned filter across the input, detecting local features.
Early layers detect edges and textures; deeper layers detect complex objects and patterns.
Pooling layers reduce spatial dimensions while retaining the most salient activations.
Recurrent Neural Networks — RNNs — process sequential data by maintaining a hidden state.
At each time step, the hidden state is updated using both the current input and the previous state.
LSTMs solve the vanishing gradient problem in plain RNNs using gating mechanisms.
The forget gate, input gate, and output gate control what information is retained or discarded.
Dropout is a regularization technique that randomly zeros activations during training.
It prevents co-adaptation of neurons and acts like training an ensemble of sub-networks.
Batch normalization normalizes activations within a mini-batch, stabilizing and accelerating training.
Weight initialization matters enormously — poor initialization can prevent the network from learning.
Xavier and He initialization set initial weights based on layer size to preserve gradient flow.
Transfer learning lets us reuse weights from a pretrained network on a related task.
Fine-tuning adjusts a small number of layers while keeping the pretrained backbone frozen.
This dramatically reduces training data requirements and computation time.
Next lecture we'll look at the Transformer architecture, which has largely replaced RNNs for sequences.
Read the Attention Is All You Need paper before class — it's dense but foundational.